Semantic Representation Before Language:
An Open Compiler Architecture for Language Learning and Preservation

Version 2.0 - July 2026


ABSTRACT

Most language technologies model language directly: they map words to
words, record phrases, or learn statistical patterns from text. This
paper argues for reversing that order. We present the Semantic
Representation Engine (SRE), an open compiler architecture that begins
with a language-independent representation of entities, affordances,
and interactions, then projects these through language-specific surface
forms, pronunciations, audio, and narrative experiences. A deterministic
compiler validates, infers, and bundles the result into a flat runtime
graph consumable by offline applications.

The system is motivated by a specific problem: most of the world's ~7,000
languages are endangered, and existing documentation and learning tools
treat vocabulary, grammar, audio, and stories as disconnected artefacts.
The SRE unifies them within a single semantic graph. It does not require
large corpora or machine learning - it requires one knowledgeable speaker
and a structured way to encode what they know.

We describe the formal semantics, compiler pipeline, inference rules,
provenance model, layered licensing framework, and a working prototype
(the River World PWA) that demonstrates the approach with Maori,
English, and Afrikaans across 10 connected learning experiences.


1. INTRODUCTION

1.1 The problem

Of the roughly 7,000 living languages in the world, approximately 3,000
are endangered [1]. A language disappears every few weeks as the last
fluent speakers pass away [2]. Revitalisation efforts face a common
bottleneck: they must document what remains before it is lost, then
transform that documentation into usable learning materials.

Existing tools fall into two camps. Documentation tools (dictionaries,
recorders, field notebooks) capture raw linguistic data but do not
produce learning experiences. Learning platforms (flashcard apps,
courseware) deliver vocabulary drills but do not incorporate the semantic
and narrative context that makes language learnable. The data rarely
flows between them.

1.2 Why semantics first?

Existing language technologies model language directly. Dictionaries map
words to definitions; phrasebooks map sentences to translations; speech
recognisers map acoustic signals to text; language models map text to
predictions. These approaches share a common assumption: that modelling
the surface forms of a language is the natural starting point.

We argue that for language documentation, teaching, and preservation,
this assumption should be reversed. The SRE begins not with words but
with the semantic world those words describe. We offer five reasons.

Ambiguity. Lexical approaches treat words as atomic units. But words
are not atomic - they are ambiguous within a language (bank can mean a
river bank, a financial institution, or a tilting manoeuvre) and
incommensurate across languages (the Maori word wairua has no exact
English equivalent; it overlaps with spirit, soul, mood, and
disposition). A semantic model resolves ambiguity by grounding words in
entities: wairua is a single entity with a defined category and
properties, and its surface forms in each language are projections of
that entity, not mappings between ambiguous strings.

Translation failure. Word-to-word translation is known to fail
systematically [3]. Languages carve semantic space differently. Maori
distinguishes tuakana (older sibling of same gender) and teina (younger
sibling of same gender) where English uses sibling for both. A
semantic model captures the underlying relationship (relative age,
shared gender) and lets each language project it appropriately. The
English surface form sibling covers the entity; the Maori surface forms
discriminate it. Neither is more correct - they are different projections
of the same semantics.

Polysemy and context. A single entity may surface in multiple forms
depending on grammatical context, register, or pragmatics. In Japanese,
the entity "I" has dozens of surface forms (watashi, boku, ore, atashi,
washi...) determined by speaker gender, formality, and social
relationship. Modelling the entity first and its surface forms as a
language-specific projection captures this naturally. Modelling words
first and trying to unify them into a semantic representation is the
same problem in reverse.

The endangered-language case. Many endangered languages lack the
lexical and corpus resources that lexical approaches depend on. They
may have a dictionary of a few thousand words, partial recordings, and
a handful of fluent speakers. A semantic model asks these speakers a
different question: not "what words does your language have?" but "what
exists in the world you describe, what can happen, and what are the
stories?" This is a fundamentally easier question to answer, because it
draws on lived experience rather than metalinguistic analysis. The
resulting model can be incomplete (not every entity needs every
language mapped) but remains internally coherent.

Language-independent reasoning. Once entities and affordances are
modelled, the system can reason about the world independently of any
particular language. Inference rules (Section 3) derive new facts from
existing ones. Lesson planners sequence content by semantic complexity
rather than vocabulary difficulty. Learners can switch languages
without restarting - they learn about rivers, then learn to say "river"
in whatever language they are studying. This is not possible when the
model is built from vocabulary up.

These five arguments motivate the central architectural decision of the
SRE: represent the world first, then project it into language.

Figure 1 contrasts this with the traditional approach:

  Traditional (lexical-first):

    Words --[combine]--> Grammar --[generate]--> Sentences --[interpret]--> Meaning

  SRE (semantics-first):

    Reality --[model]--> Semantics (entities, affordances, interactions)
        |
        +--[Project]--> Language A surface forms
        |
        +--[Project]--> Language B surface forms
        |
        +--[Project]--> Language C surface forms

Where the traditional pipeline derives meaning from words, SRE starts
with meaning and derives words from it.

1.3 Design goals

1. Speaker-minimal input - A single fluent speaker should be able to
   create a usable language package.
2. Language independence - The core engine has no language-specific
   code. All language knowledge is data.
3. Offline-first - Resulting applications must work without internet
   access, appropriate for communities with limited connectivity.
4. Provenance tracking - Every fact in the system traces to its source,
   with license and attribution metadata.
5. Community ownership - Language data retains community-controlled
    licensing; only the engine is open source.

1.4 Contributions

This paper makes the following contributions:

1. A language-independent semantic representation model grounded in
   entities, affordances, and interactions rather than vocabulary.
2. A deterministic compiler that validates source corpora, infers
   implicit facts, and bundles the result into a flat runtime graph.
3. A provenance-preserving architecture that traces every compiled
   fact to its source file, line number, compiler version, and
   content hash.
4. A modular language and voice package system where surface forms,
   pronunciations, audio recordings, and licensing terms are
   independently versioned and composable.
5. A working demonstration (the River World PWA) across three
   languages (Maori, English, Afrikaans) with measurable corpus
   metrics including inference yield and semantic density.

1.5 Non-goals

SRE is not designed to compete with or replace several related
technologies. It is explicitly not:

1. A large language model. SRE does not generate text, translate
   between languages, or complete partial utterances. It compiles
   authored content into an interactive form.
2. A machine translation system. Language mappings are authored by
   human contributors, not learned from parallel corpora.
3. A speech recognition or synthesis engine. SRE consumes audio
   recordings and TTS output but does not produce them.
4. A replacement for linguistic fieldwork. SRE assumes documented
   entities and surface forms as input; it does not discover them
   from raw recordings or texts.
5. A large-scale knowledge graph. The curated entity graph is
   intentionally small (tens to low hundreds of entities per corpus)
   and trades coverage for provenance and pedagogical coherence.

These boundaries prevent misunderstanding: SRE is infrastructure for
organising and deploying language data, not a general AI or NLP system.


2. FORMAL MODEL

2.1 Universe of discourse

Let:
  E = set of entities
  C = set of ontology categories
  A = set of action types
  R = set of relationship types
  L = set of language codes
  S = set of surface forms (strings)
  P = set of provenance records

2.2 Entity

An entity is the fundamental unit of semantic representation:

  e in E
  e = (id, cat, label, def, props)

where:
  id   - unique identifier, format [CAT]_NNN
  cat  - exactly one ontology category (THING, PERSON, ACTION, STATE, PLACE,...)
  label - non-empty set of labels with a distinguished 'default'
  def  - optional prose definition
  props - optional key-value properties

Invariant: Entity IDs are permanent. Once assigned, never reassigned.

2.3 Affordance

An affordance represents what an entity can do or what can be done to it:

  a = (e_id, act, desc, actors, outcome, equip, cultural)

Affordances are grounded in ecological psychology [3]: they describe
possibilities for action, not static properties. A river affords
drinking from, swimming in, and flowing through. These are not facts
about the river's substance but about its relationship to actors.

2.4 Language Mapping

A language mapping is a function projecting entities into surface forms:

  lambda: L -> (E -> S x Pron x Gram x Usage)

Each language is an equally valid projection over the same semantic
space. No language is privileged.

2.5 Surface Form and Pronunciation

A surface form is a word or phrase in a specific language representing
an entity. Each surface form carries a Pronunciation:

  pron in Pron
  pron = (ipa, syllables, stress, audio_refs)

where audio_refs links to voice package files with provenance:

  audio_ref in AudioRef
  audio_ref = (ref, package, speaker, dialect, quality,
               source_url, retrieved, source_license)

2.6 Relationship

Relationships connect entities:

  rel = (src, type, tgt, strength, meta)

Relationship types include is_a (taxonomic), part_of (meronymic),
located_in (spatial), requires (dependency), similar_to (analogy).

Constraint: No cycles in is_a or part_of chains.

2.7 Interaction

An interaction records a specific event:

  i = (i_id, parts, act, time, loc, outcomes)

Interactions are immutable once recorded. If erroneous, they are marked
superseded, never deleted or modified.

2.8 Experience

An experience is the smallest complete learning unit - a story, dialogue,
observation, procedure, or game. Each experience embeds entities,
affordances, and interactions within a narrative context. Experiences
are scored for semantic density and entity reuse to ensure graph cohesion.

2.9 Confidence

Every fact carries a confidence score derived from its source:

  Source type                Default confidence
  Direct observation (manual)   1.0
  Imported dictionary           0.95
  Wikipedia-sourced             0.90
  LLM-generated                 0.65
  User guess                    0.40
  Derived (inferred)            product of source confidences

Confidence is multiplicative for derived facts:

  confidence(derived) = PI(confidence(sources))

2.10 Compiler and Projection Functions

The compiler is modelled as a typed function over two representations:

  Canonical = P(Entity) x P(Affordance) x P(Relationship) x P(Interaction) x P(Experience)
  Runtime = (V, E, ProvenanceMap, Index)

where V is the set of graph nodes (derived from entities and affordances),
E is the set of edges (derived from relationships and interactions),
ProvenanceMap attaches metadata to each node and edge, and Index
provides lookup structures.

The compilation function:

  Compile : Canonical -> Runtime

is deterministic and composed of stage functions:

  Load : Path -> Canonical
  Validate : Canonical -> Canonical | Error
  Infer : Canonical -> Canonical
  BuildGraph : Canonical -> (V, E)
  AttachProvenance : (V, E) -> (V, E, ProvenanceMap)
  Index : (V, E, ProvenanceMap) -> Runtime
  Write : Runtime -> ArtifactSet

Pipeline composition:

  Write(Index(AttachProvenance(BuildGraph(Infer(Validate(Load(src)))))))

Each stage is pure: same input always produces the same output.

Projection is the language-mapping function from entities to surface
forms and pronunciations:

  Project : E x L -> S x Pron

This function is not computed — it is specified by the language
contributor for each entity-language pair. The compiler validates that
Project is total over the declared language set (each entity must have
at least one surface form per language) but does not infer projections.

The hash function anchors provenance:

  Hash : Node -> SHA256(node_content)

Applied to every node and edge before writing. The hash is included in
the provenance record so that any downstream consumer can verify that a
given fact is exactly what the compiler produced.

Provenance attaches to every compiled element:

  Provenance : Node -> (source_file, source_line, compiler_version,
                        timestamp, hash)

This is not optional. The compiler halts if provenance metadata cannot
be resolved for any element.

The compiler transforms validated source documents into a runtime graph
through eleven stages, applied deterministically:

Stage 1: Load
  Discover and parse source files (YAML, JSON, Markdown). Group by
  document type. No validation is performed at this stage.

Stage 2: Validate
  Apply JSON Schema validation and domain-specific contract checks:
  entity ID format, reference resolution, cycle detection, cardinality
  constraints. All validation rules (V001-V083) are defined in the formal
  specification and checked automatically.

Stage 3: Diagnose
  Produce structured diagnostics with error codes, file:line precision,
  and suggested fixes. Errors halt the pipeline; warnings do not.

Stage 4: Infer
  Apply inference rules (INF001-INF010) to derive implicit facts.

Stage 5: Build Graph
  Create graph nodes for entities and edges for relationships,
  affordances, and interactions. Attach representations and language
  mappings as node properties.

Stage 6: Attach Provenance
  Trace every node and edge to its source file, line, compiler version,
  timestamp, and content hash.

Stage 7: Index
  Build full-text, frequency, and relationship indexes for fast runtime
  lookup.

Stages 8-10 (Plugin)
  Optionally build lessons, grammar projections, and vector embeddings
  through swappable plugins. Plugin output is deterministic given the
  same input.

Stage 11: Write
  Serialize the runtime graph atomically. Either all artifacts are
  written, or none are.

Pipeline guarantees:
  1. Stages 1-3 are deterministic and language-agnostic.
  2. Stages 4-7 are deterministic. Same source -> same graph.
  3. Stages 8-10 accept plugins without changing core output.
  4. Stage 11 writes atomically.


3. INFERENCE RULES

Inference rules derive new facts from existing ones during compilation.
Each inference records its rule, source facts, and computed confidence.

INF001 - Affordance Inheritance

  IF entity_a is_a entity_b AND entity_b affords action X
  THEN INFER entity_a affords action X
  WITH confidence = confidence(b -> X) x 0.9

Subtypes inherit affordances from their parents. A dog is an animal;
an animal can drink; therefore a dog can drink.

INF002 - Compositional Affordance

  IF tool affords action on patient
  AND person uses tool to act on patient
  THEN INFER tool affords action on patient
  WITH confidence = confidence(uses) x 0.85

If a net is used for catching fish, the net affords catching fish.

INF003 - Chain Affordance

  IF entity_a affords action_X AND action_X results_in state_Y
  THEN INFER entity_a indirectly affords state_Y

If water affords drinking and drinking results in hydration, then water
indirectly affords hydration.

INF004 - Reverse Affordance (Need Transitivity)

  IF person requires entity_a AND entity_a requires entity_b
  THEN INFER person requires entity_b

INF005 - Template Applicability
  Suggest grammatical templates given entity categories.

INF006 - Linguistic Disambiguation
  Flag when one entity maps to multiple surface forms in the same
  language without explanation.

INF007 - Semantic Similarity

  IF entity_a and entity_b share >= 3 affordances
  THEN INFER entity_a similar_to entity_b

INF008 - Lesson Ordering
  Concrete entities should precede abstract ones in lesson progression.

INF009 - Concept Prerequisite
  Required concepts must be learned before templates that use them.

INF010 - Cultural Context
  Flag cultural affordances without direct language mapping for special
  pedagogical treatment.


4. PROVENANCE

Provenance is not optional in the SRE. Every node and edge in the
runtime graph carries:

  provenance:
    source_file: "languages/mi/surface_forms.yaml"
    source_line: 142
    compiler_version: "0.1.0"
    timestamp: "2026-07-20T12:00:00Z"
    hash: "sha256:a1b2c3..."

Audio references carry additional provenance:

  audio_ref:
    ref: "wai.mp3"
    package: "mi_teaka_v1"
    source_url: "https://maoridictionary.co.nz/word/9019"
    retrieved: "2026-07-20"
    source_license: "Copyright John C Moorfield - educational use"

This enables:
  - Auditability: Every fact can be traced to its source.
  - License compliance: Applications can enforce per-asset licensing.
  - Community attribution: Contributors receive credit for their data.
  - Error correction: Erroneous facts can be traced and corrected.


5. LAYERED LICENSING

The SRE uses a layered licensing model to respect both software freedom
and community data sovereignty:

  Layer                       License
  Engine (core, scripts,      Apache 2.0
    compiler)
  Language packages           Community chooses
  Voice packages              Contributor chooses
  Media assets                Original license retained

The engine is fully open source (Apache 2.0) - anyone can use it,
modify it, build commercial products on it, without asking permission.

Language data remains under community control. A Maori community may
choose CC BY-SA 4.0, a traditional knowledge license, or any other
terms they consider appropriate. The compiler preserves license
metadata through compilation, so the runtime graph can enforce
per-asset restrictions if needed.

This is a deliberate design decision: the infrastructure is shared,
but the knowledge belongs to its creators.


6. IMPLEMENTATION: RIVER WORLD

The first application is an offline Progressive Web App (PWA) called
River World - a Maori-English-Afrikaans learning experience.

Table 1 summarises the River World corpus metrics.

  Table 1: Corpus metrics
  +-------------------------------+------+
  | Metric                        | Value|
  +-------------------------------+------+
  | Entities                      |   33 |
  | Categories                    |    8 |
  | Languages                     |    3 |
  | Surface forms                 |   99 |
  | Experiences                   |   10 |
  | Graph edges (total)           |   48 |
  | Edges written manually        |   30 |
  | Edges inferred                |   18 |
  | Inference yield               |  38% |
  | Entity reuse ratio            | 0.60 |
  | Semantic density              | 0.70 |
  | Runtime size (JS bundles)     | 65 KB|
  | Surface forms bundle          | 31 KB|
  | Experiences bundle            | 17 KB|
  | Application code              | 15 KB|
  | Voice package metadata        |  2 KB|
  +-------------------------------+------+

Entity categories break down as follows:

  Table 2: Entity distribution by category
  +----------+----+
  | Category |    |
  +----------+----+
  | THING    |  8 |
  | ANIMAL   |  3 |
  | PERSON   |  4 |
  | ACTION   |  6 |
  | STATE    |  4 |
  | PLACE    |  3 |
  | EMOTION  |  2 |
  | QUALITY  |  3 |
  +----------+----+

Inference yield of 38% means that over a third of the graph's
semantic connections were derived automatically rather than written
manually, validating the inference rule set (Section 3) on real data.
Entity reuse ratio of 0.60 indicates that each entity appears in 60%
of experiences on average, above the 0.6 target for intermediate
content. Semantic density of 0.7 entities per sentence indicates
efficient packing of meaning into narrative text.

Voice packages:
  - mi_teaka_v1: 30 native speaker recordings from Te Aka Maori
    Dictionary, covering 32 of 33 Maori surface forms
  - en_placeholder_v1: English TTS fallback
  - af_placeholder_v1: Afrikaans TTS fallback

Architecture:
  The app runs entirely in the browser:
  1. Data layer - Compiled JS bundles (experiences, surface forms,
     voice packages)
  2. Audio layer - Fallback chain: native recording -> other package
     recording -> Web Speech API TTS
  3. Application layer - Experience renderer, language selector,
     voice package selector, entity chip system for inline audio
  4. Offline layer - Service worker caches all assets; no backend

Semantic density:
  The River World corpus achieves a semantic density of approximately
  0.7 entities per sentence (target: 0.5+ for beginner content) and an
  entity reuse ratio of approximately 0.6 (target: 0.6+ for intermediate
  content), indicating strong graph cohesion.


7. RELATED WORK

Language documentation:
  The dominant tools in linguistic fieldwork are annotation and lexicon
  management systems. ELAN [4] provides time-aligned transcription and
  annotation of audio and video, widely used for documentary linguistics
  and language archiving. FieldWorks Language Explorer (FLEx) [5] is a
  lexicon and text analysis tool that supports morphological parsing,
  interlinear glossing, and dictionary production. SayMore [6] focuses
  on workflow management for language documentation, handling media
  files, session metadata, and transcription workflow.

  These tools are mature and effective at what they do. They capture
  linguistic data at a level of granularity appropriate for analysis and
  archiving. None of them produces a deployable learning application.
  A fieldworker who completes documentation in ELAN and FLEx must still
  manually create learning materials - flashcards, storybooks, exercises -
  from the resulting data, a process that is labour-intensive and
  error-prone. The gap between documentation and teaching materials is
  well recognised in the revitalisation literature [11].

  The SRE is designed as a consumer of documentation output. It does not
  replace ELAN or FLEx. It accepts structured data (entity definitions,
  surface forms, pronunciations, narratives) in documented formats and
  produces a compiled runtime graph that can drive interactive learning
  applications directly. This bridges the documentation-to-teaching gap
  without requiring fieldworkers to become software developers.

  A secondary challenge in language documentation is the fragmentation
  of tool-specific formats. Data locked in proprietary or tool-specific
  formats is difficult to migrate, archive, or reuse [12]. The SRE's
  source format (YAML/JSON with JSON Schema validation) is intentionally
  simple, documented, and tool-agnostic, designed to be generated by
  script from any existing format or authored directly in a text editor.

Language learning platforms:
  Duolingo, Memrise, and Anki are effective for vocabulary acquisition
  but model word pairs rather than semantic relationships. They do not
  preserve community provenance or support offline deployment for
  underserved communities.

Language revitalisation:
  The SRE is situated within a broader revitalisation literature that
  has shaped its design priorities. Hinton [21] documents strategies
  for language revitalisation in practice, emphasising the importance
  of creating speakers rather than simply documenting languages - a
  goal that requires usable learning materials, not just archives. The
  SRE's compiler pipeline addresses this directly by transforming
  documentation into a deployable teaching application.

  Hale [22] and Fishman [23] established the theoretical foundations
  of language revitalisation, including the distinction between
  language maintenance (preserving an existing speaker base) and
  revitalisation (reversing language shift). Fishman's Graded
  Intergenerational Disruption Scale (GIDS) classifies languages by
  their stage of endangerment. The SRE is designed for Stage 7-8
  languages (the most endangered), where few fluent speakers remain
  and the goal is to document what exists and create learning materials
  for the next generation.

  A recurring theme in the revitalisation literature is the importance
  of community control over language data [24]. Communities are
  increasingly reluctant to contribute their knowledge to platforms
  that claim ownership or impose restrictive licensing. The SRE's
  layered licensing model (Section 5) is a direct response to this
  concern: the engine is open source, but language data remains under
  community-chosen terms.

Educational theory:
  The SRE's experience model is informed by second-language acquisition
  theory, though it does not prescribe any particular pedagogical
  approach. Krashen's Input Hypothesis [25] argues that language is
  acquired through comprehensible input - messages that learners can
  understand despite not knowing every word. The SRE's semantic density
  metric (entities per sentence) provides a quantitative proxy for
  comprehensibility: lower density implies more comprehensible input
  for beginners. The entity reuse ratio targets Swain's [26] emphasis
  on pushed output - learners must repeatedly encounter and produce
  the same entities across different contexts, not just once.

  Nation's four strands framework [27] identifies meaning-focused input,
  meaning-focused output, language-focused learning, and fluency
  development as the four necessary components of a balanced language
  course. The SRE's experience types map to these strands: stories
  provide meaning-focused input, dialogues require output, vocabulary
  lists support language-focused learning, and repeated experiences
  build fluency. This mapping is not automated - it is a guide for
  experience authors - but the compiler's indexing and ordering rules
  (INF008, INF009) support it.

Semantic networks and ontologies:
  The best-known lexical-semantic resource is WordNet [7], which organises
  English words into synonym sets (synsets) connected by lexical relations
  such as hypernymy, hyponymy, and meronymy. WordNet has been extended to
  many languages through the Global WordNet initiative, but each language's
  WordNet is constructed independently, making cross-lingual alignment
  a separate research problem. The SRE avoids this by aligning all languages
  to a shared entity graph rather than aligning wordnets to each other.

  FrameNet [8] is closer to the SRE's approach. It models frames -
  schematic representations of situations and their participants - and
  maps lexical units to frames. A river would be part of a NaturalFeatures
  frame; drinking would be part of an Ingestion frame. FrameNet's frames
  are semantic structures, and its cross-lingual extensions (e.g.,
  Spanish FrameNet, Japanese FrameNet) demonstrate that frame-based
  semantic modelling can work across languages. The SRE's affordance
  model is functionally similar to frame semantics but simpler: an
  affordance is a single action possibility attached to an entity, rather
  than a complex frame with multiple roles and relations.

  ConceptNet [9] builds a large-scale semantic graph from crowd-sourced
  and expert-contributed knowledge. With millions of edges, it is orders
  of magnitude larger than the SRE's curated entity graphs. ConceptNet
  sacrifices provenance for scale: edges have confidence scores but not
  traceable attribution to specific sources or licenses. The SRE takes
  the opposite trade-off: smaller graphs, but every edge traces to a
  source file, line number, and content hash.

  Top-level ontologies such as Cyc [13], SUMO [14], and DOLCE [15] model
  the fundamental categories of reality at a level of philosophical rigour
  far beyond the SRE's needs. Cyc contains millions of hand-authored
  logical assertions about the world; SUMO provides a formal foundation
  for WordNet; DOLCE distinguishes enduring from perduring entities,
  physical from abstract, and so on. The SRE's category system (THING,
  PERSON, ACTION, STATE, PLACE, ANIMAL, EMOTION, QUALITY) is deliberately
  minimal and flat, designed to be immediately usable by a language
  contributor without ontological training. This is a pragmatic choice:
  the goal is not to model the universe but to support language learning
  across a limited domain.

Cognitive linguistics:
  The SRE's semantic model has deep affinity with cognitive linguistics,
  a tradition that treats language as grounded in embodied experience
  rather than as an autonomous formal system. We briefly note the major
  points of alignment.

  Fillmore's frame semantics [16] holds that word meanings are
  understood only against a background frame of structured experience.
  The word river evokes a frame containing water, banks, flow, and
  human activities (fishing, crossing, drinking). The SRE's affordance
  model formalises this: each entity carries the action possibilities
  that constitute its frame. A river entity with affordances flows,
  drinking, and crossing is, in Fillmore's terms, a frame structured
  by its participants and actions.

  Lakoff's cognitive semantics [17] argues that categories are not
  defined by necessary and sufficient conditions but by prototypes,
  radial structures, and experiential grounding. The SRE's entity model
  is prototype-compatible: entities have a distinguished default label
  (the prototypical name) but allow multiple surface forms that capture
  category variation. The is_a hierarchy supports inheritance without
  requiring classical definitional boundaries.

  Langacker's cognitive grammar [18] treats linguistic structure as
  inherently symbolic, consisting of form-meaning pairings at multiple
  levels of schematicity. The SRE's distinction between semantic
  representation (entities, affordances) and surface forms (words,
  phrases) mirrors Langacker's separation of conceptual content from
  its symbolic encoding. The compiler's projection function
  (Section 2.10) is a formalisation of this symbolic relationship.

  Talmy's force dynamics [19] analyses how language encodes causal
  interactions between entities: what exerts force, what resists, what
  changes state. The SRE's affordance model is implicitly force-dynamic.
  An entity that affords pushing exerts force on a patient entity that
  affords being pushed. A river that affords flowing has an intrinsic
  force tendency; a dam that affords blocking exerts opposing force.
  Talmy's framework could provide a more principled basis for the
  affordance type system in future work.

  Tomasello's usage-based theory of language acquisition [20] argues
  that children learn language through intention-reading and pattern-
  finding in communicative interactions. The SRE's experience model
  supports this: experiences are narrative contexts in which entities
  interact, providing the intentional and usage-based grounding that
  drives language learning. Experiences are scored for entity reuse
  (how often each entity appears across experiences), reflecting the
  usage-based principle that frequency drives entrenchment.

  We do not claim that the SRE implements cognitive linguistics. The
  overlaps are structural: both traditions start from meaning rather
  than form, both ground language in embodied interaction, and both
  treat categories as flexible rather than definitional. These
  alignments suggest that the SRE's design is consistent with a
  substantial body of theoretical linguistics, even though the SRE
  was developed from engineering rather than linguistic first principles.

Multilingual semantic models:
  BabelNet [10] and other multilingual ontologies project meaning across
  languages automatically. The SRE does not attempt automatic projection -
  it requires human-authored mappings - but it does provide the
  structural framework for those mappings to be composed, validated,
  and deployed.

Speech technology and voice:
  The SRE's audio layer is not a speech technology system - it is an
  orchestration layer that selects among available audio sources.
  Text-to-speech engines such as eSpeak [28], Festival [29], and modern
  neural TTS systems (e.g., Tacotron, WaveNet) provide the actual
  speech synthesis. The SRE preference is always for human recordings
  over synthesis, with TTS as fallback.

  For languages with existing audio resources, forced-alignment tools
  such as the Montreal Forced Aligner (MFA) [30] can generate
  time-aligned phoneme transcriptions from recordings, which could
  feed into the SRE's pronunciation model. This is not yet implemented
  but is a natural integration point.

  The critical design consideration in the SRE's audio model is
  provenance and consent. Voice data is personally identifying and
  culturally sensitive. A speaker's recording of a word or phrase is
  their voice, not a generic asset. The SRE's audio reference model
  (Section 2.5) carries speaker attribution, source URL, retrieval
  date, and license terms for every recording. This is more metadata
  than most speech systems track, but it is necessary for community-
  controlled language work where speakers must retain agency over
  how their voice is used.


8. LIMITATIONS AND FUTURE WORK

Limitations:
  1. Scale - The SRE is designed for curated rather than corpus-driven
     language models. It is appropriate for endangered languages with
     limited documentation but would not replace statistical or neural
     approaches for large languages with abundant data.
  2. Grammar - The current implementation handles surface forms and
     pronunciations but does not model inflectional morphology or syntax
     beyond sentence templates. Full grammatical modelling is future work.
  3. Speaker requirement - The system requires a speaker who can model
     entities, write surface forms, and compose experiences. For languages
     with no living speakers, the SRE can serve as a repository for
     historical documentation but cannot generate new content.
  4. Audio quality - Current voice packages rely on existing recordings
     (Te Aka Maori Dictionary) whose license terms may not permit
     redistribution. Community-recorded replacements are needed for
     production use.

Future work:
   1. Workshop submission - Submission of this work to a computational
      linguistics or language technology venue.
  2. Corpus expansion - Scaling River World from 10 to 50+ experiences
     to validate graph cohesion at larger sizes.
  3. Additional languages - Adding languages from different families
     (Polynesian, Germanic, Bantu, etc.) to stress-test the language-
     independent core.
  4. Grammar modelling - Adding morphological paradigm support and
     syntactic template composition.
  5. Community pilot - Deploying with an endangered-language community
     to test real-world usability and iterating on the workflow.
  6. Import tools - Building converters from existing dictionary formats
     (XML, JSON, CSV) to reduce the cost of creating a new language
     package.


9. CONCLUSION

The Semantic Representation Engine proposes that language documentation
and teaching can be unified within a single semantic graph - that
vocabulary, pronunciation, audio, grammar, narrative, and learning
progression are not separate artefacts but projections of a shared
underlying model.

The architecture is deliberately minimal: entities represent what exists,
affordances represent what can happen, surface forms represent how
languages express these, and experiences place them in human context.
The compiler ensures consistency; provenance ensures accountability;
layered licensing ensures community control.

For the ~3,000 endangered languages where every fluent speaker counts,
this approach offers a path from raw documentation to deployable learning
application without requiring large datasets, cloud infrastructure, or
proprietary software.


REFERENCES

[1]  Moseley, C. (ed.). (2010). Atlas of the World's Languages in
     Danger, 3rd ed. UNESCO Publishing.

[2]  Krauss, M. (1992). "The world's languages in crisis." Language,
     68(1), 4-10.

[3]  Gibson, J. J. (1979). The Ecological Approach to Visual
     Perception. Houghton Mifflin.

[4]  Wittenburg, P., Brugman, H., Russel, A., Klassmann, A., &
     Slootjes, H. (2006). "ELAN: a Professional Framework for
     Multimodality Research." Proceedings of LREC 2006.

[5]  SIL International. FieldWorks Language Explorer (FLEx).
     https://software.sil.org/fieldworks/

[6]  SIL International. SayMore. https://software.sil.org/saymore/

[7]  Miller, G. A. (1995). "WordNet: A Lexical Database for English."
     Communications of the ACM, 38(11), 39-41.

[8]  Baker, C. F., Fillmore, C. J., & Lowe, J. B. (1998). "The
     Berkeley FrameNet Project." Proceedings of COLING-ACL 1998.

[9]  Speer, R., Chin, J., & Havasi, C. (2017). "ConceptNet 5.5: An
     Open Multilingual Graph of General Knowledge." Proceedings of
     AAAI 2017.

[10] Navigli, R., & Ponzetto, S. P. (2012). "BabelNet: The Automatic
     Construction, Evaluation and Application of a Wide-Coverage
     Multilingual Semantic Network." Artificial Intelligence, 193,
     217-250.

[11] Austin, P. K., & Sallabank, J. (eds.). (2011). The Cambridge
     Handbook of Endangered Languages. Cambridge University Press.

[12] Bird, S., & Simons, G. (2003). "Seven Dimensions of Portability
     for Language Documentation and Description." Language, 79(3),
     557-582.

[13] Lenat, D. B. (1995). "Cyc: A Large-Scale Investment in Knowledge
     Infrastructure." Communications of the ACM, 38(11), 33-38.

[14] Niles, I., & Pease, A. (2001). "Towards a Standard Upper
     Ontology." Proceedings of FOIS 2001.

[15] Gangemi, A., Guarino, N., Masolo, C., Oltramari, A., &
     Schneider, L. (2002). "Sweetening Ontologies with DOLCE."
     Proceedings of EKAW 2002.

[16] Fillmore, C. J. (1982). "Frame Semantics." In Linguistics in the
     Morning Calm, 111-137. Hanshin Publishing.

[17] Lakoff, G. (1987). Women, Fire, and Dangerous Things: What
     Categories Reveal about the Mind. University of Chicago Press.

[18] Langacker, R. W. (1987). Foundations of Cognitive Grammar,
     Vol. 1: Theoretical Prerequisites. Stanford University Press.

[19] Talmy, L. (2000). Toward a Cognitive Semantics, Vol. 1: Concept
     Structuring Systems. MIT Press.

[20] Tomasello, M. (2003). Constructing a Language: A Usage-Based
     Theory of Language Acquisition. Harvard University Press.

[21] Hinton, L. (2001). "Language Revitalisation: An Overview." In
     Hinton, L., & Hale, K. (eds.), The Green Book of Language
     Revitalisation in Practice, 3-18. Academic Press.

[22] Hale, K. (1992). "Language Endangerment and the Human Value of
     Linguistic Diversity." Language, 68(1), 35-42.

[23] Fishman, J. A. (1991). Reversing Language Shift: Theoretical and
     Empirical Foundations of Assistance to Threatened Languages.
     Multilingual Matters.

[24] Holton, G. (2011). "The Role of Information Technology in
     Supporting Minority and Endangered Languages." In Austin, P. K.,
     & Sallabank, J. (eds.), The Cambridge Handbook of Endangered
     Languages, 371-399. Cambridge University Press.

[25] Krashen, S. D. (1985). The Input Hypothesis: Issues and
     Implications. Longman.

[26] Swain, M. (2005). "The Output Hypothesis: Theory and Research."
     In Hinkel, E. (ed.), Handbook of Research in Second Language
     Teaching and Learning, 471-483. Routledge.

[27] Nation, I. S. P. (2007). "The Four Strands." Innovation in
     Language Learning and Teaching, 1(1), 2-13.

[28] Duddington, J. (2012). eSpeak Text-to-Speech.
     https://espeak.sourceforge.net/

[29] Black, A. W., & Taylor, P. (1997). "The Festival Speech
     Synthesis System." Proceedings of Eurospeech 1997.

[30] McAuliffe, M., Socolof, M., Mihuc, S., Wagner, M., & Sonderegger,
     M. (2017). "Montreal Forced Aligner: Trainable Text-Speech
     Alignment Using Kaldi." Proceedings of Interspeech 2017.
